---
title: Features
author: Stav Klein
date: 2021-04-07
category: morphology
layout: post
---

> Last Modified: 03/05/2021


## References
[UD Features][1] - We do not use every feature listed on this page, but we can (and should) consult it if needed.
[UD POS][2] - Same

## General Principle
We assign morphological features to a token according to its features **in the context**. So, for example, if we can tell from the given sentence that the speaker is female and she uses the pronoun 'I', we can safely classify this pronoun as feminine. We would want to refrain from assigning ambiguous features as much as possible, but use your judgement.


### The Gender Wars
Our set of possible values for gender includes: `Masculine`, `Feminine`, `FemMasc`, and `Unspecified`.
Masculine and Feminine values go without saying (and remember the general principle above). Let's address the difference between `FemMasc` and `Unspecified`.<br>
`FemMasc` is for cases where **both** gender suffixes are specified on the token. Such as: ילדות.ים, מעונייניםות, רוצימות etc. <br>
`Unspecified` is for cases where the gender cannot be determined in context. for example, in the sentence "העוגה הוגשה אחרי שהלכנו", the verb "הלכנו" is ambiguous and is labeled `Unspecified`.<br>

**Important**<br>
In the sentence "הילדות הלכו לים" the gender of the verb is unambiguous (Feminine plural), and the same goes for the sentence "הבנים הלכו לים" (Masculine plural). Regardless of the fact that the surface form "הלכו" appears in both. Remember that we annotate tokens in a specific sentence and NOT arbitrary entries in a dictionary, floating context-free in space :earth_africa:


### The Numbers Game
The set of Number values is: `Singular`, `Plural`, and `Dual` (where `Dual` is a special case of plural, essentially).<br>
It's important to use the `Dual` tag for tokens that are **truly** dual (i.e. exactly two **in context**), and not as a general mark for the suffix יים-. <br>
Examples:<br>
- קבענו פגישה מחרתיים = Dual
- לעכבישים יש שמונה רגליים = Plural

Generally, the `Dual` tag should be used in moderation, as it is not very productive and there's a pretty closed-set of words that are potentially dual in nature.<br>

Uncountable nouns (סוכר, אורז, זהב, etc.) are labeled `Singular` or `Plural` depending on the context: <br>
- סוכר חום = Singular
- מים חמים = Plural
<br>

>As a general advice, if the adjective does not appear naturally in the sentence, you can come up with an **appropriate** modifier yourselves to help you decide what is the correct number (this is true because adjectives agree with their modified noun in gender, number and definiteness)

### Person
Beside the general principle that still holds for pronouns, there is the "unspecified" option for person which is `1,2,3`. It should be avoided if possible.


### The Case with Cases
Cases are assigned to adpositions (and sometimes to nouns, if they are inflected as a result of case marking) as follows:

- `Acc` - is assigned ONLY to את, this is the only "true" accusative marking in Hebrew.
- `Obl` - is assigned to necessary complements of a predicate. E.g. אמרתי משהו. The complement `משהו` is marked `Obl` - this is the only situation in which a case-uninflected noun is marked for case. In cases where the complement is preceded by a preposition, e.g. אני גר בירושלים, the preposition ב is assigned `Obl`.
- `Gen` - is assigned to the possesive marker של (and its conjugations), and to case-inflected nouns (**בית**נו). Note that neither part of construct states (נסמך nor סומך) is marked as `Genitive`, since we already tag those forms as `Construct` under the `Definite` feature and there is no need for double marking.
- `Dative` - is the general case for indirect objects (= that are marked with ל ). E.g. קניתי ספר ליוסי, the preposition ל is assigned `Dative`.
- `Locative` - is the case assigned to adpositions signaling location/direction/source/destination in space, like הביתה, צפונה, לירושלים, מחיפה, אל. These are almost always found in motion verbs.

> Important Note: Not every adposition must be assigned a case. Assign a case ONLY when it fits one of the descriptions above. Adjuncts (= non-necessary complements) are unmarked.


### The Special PRON Features

- `PronType`:
    - `Demonstrative`: זה, הללו, אלה, etc.
    - `Negative`: אף אחד, etc.
    - `Interrogative`: מי, איזה, etc (Note this is only applies to question words that are "pronominal" in nature, not to every question word)
    - `Total`: כולם, כל אחד, etc.
    - `Indefinite`: מישהו, משהו, etc.
- `Poss`: The pronominal suffix on possessed nouns (the ו in ספריו, the נו in ביתנו, etc.)
- `Reflexive`: to denote reflexive pronouns such as עצמו, עצמם, etc.



This table summarizes the morphological features that should be specified for each category and their possible values

| POS  | Features and Values                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| VERB | Voice = Active, Passive (infinitives are not specified for voice)<br>Tense = Past, Present, Future, Imperative, Infinitive<br>Binyan = Paal, Nifal, Hifil, Hufal, Piel, Pual, Hitpael<br>Root (use only non-final characters. :heavy_check_mark:זמנ)<br>Person = 1, 2, 3, 123<br>Number = Sing., Plur.<br>Gender = Fem., Masc., FemMasc, Unspecified|
| NOUN | Number = Sing., Plur., Dual<br>Gender = Fem., Masc., FemMasc, Unspecified<br>Definite = Def, Indef, Construct<br>Case = Locative (or unspecified)                                                                                                                                       |
| PRON | Number = Sing., Plur<br>Gender = Fem., Masc., FemMasc, Unspecified<br>Person = 1, 2, 3, 123<br>Poss = Yes (not specified = No)<br>PronType = Demonstrative, Negative, Interrogative, Total, Indefinite<br>Reflexive = Yes (not specified = No)<br>Case = Gen                                  |
| ADJ  | Gender = Fem., Masc., FemMasc, Unspecified<br>Number = Sing., Plur (There are no dual adjectives)<br>Definite = Def, Indef, Construct                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| ADP  | Case = Obl, Gen, Acc, Dative, Locative (or unspecified)      


[1]: https://universaldependencies.org/u/feat/index.html
[2]: https://universaldependencies.org/u/pos/index.html